He operated a bulldozer in Puerto Rico and a hotel in the West Indies.
He trained as a circus aerialist, served three years as a seaman, and worked in advertising.
Now, if you think this sounds like the typical biography of an American author, you're right.
His name is Theodore Sturgeon, but he's not exactly typical.
His numerous stories and novels are chiefly in the area of science fiction or fantasy.
He's one of only three writers who have won all three of the major science fiction awards,
the International Fatasy Award, the Hugo and the Nebula Awards.
Mr. Sturgeon has been in the area attending Conclave 3, a meeting of science fiction writers
and fans sponsored by the Eastern Michigan University Science Fiction Society.
Mr. Sturgeon, let me leap feet foremost into this.
And I'll ask you first what in your view is the major difference between science fiction today
and other types of imaginative writing?
Well, essentially you're asking me for a definition of science fiction, and I have to tell you with the outset
that nobody has yet succeeded in defining science fiction in a way that does not leak,
with the possible exception of Damon Knight, who said,
science fiction is whatever you happen to be pointing at when you're talking about it.
There are those who claim that I have never written a science fiction story in my life.
These are the hardcore nuts and bolts, zap guns, space flight, hard chemistry, hard biology type.
They don't feel that science fiction is science fiction without it.
Or gimmick.
That's right.
Good science fiction has, first of all, I think, to be good fiction.
Good fiction is people.
A lot of science fiction does lack that particular quality.
Those qualities of compassion and of love and of internal growth
and so on, where the person is the most important thing.
Good fiction is the interaction between people and ideas.
If you write a story about an idea only,
you might have something very compelling, but it's a tract.
It isn't a story.
I really start from there, and this is why, as I say, I have been accused
by the hardcore science fiction addicts of not writing real science fiction at all.
Yet I have done a lot about space flight and about biology and about evolution and so on.
Well, I sometimes wondered, Francis, a writer like Donald Barthel, may,
is not so very far, in some ways, from some science fiction.
This is a very interesting thing.
Science fiction is coming out of its own special ghetto, which it lived for about 40 years.
There's an interesting thing about people who survive ghetto living.
They come out strong, because if they're going to survive at all,
they have to be a little bit stronger.
I think you'll find a larger percentage of good writing
and of really fascinating, good inventive thinking in the area of science fiction
than you'll find in anywhere else.
You see it exploding all around you now.
In 1965, there were two courses in science fiction,
one in Pennsylvania and one in Eastern New Mexico.
This year, there are close to 3,000,
and one of my endeavors recently has been teaching teachers,
teaching a symposium of teachers of science fiction,
because with 3,000 courses, there's nobody to teach it without taking a special course.
What they end up doing is teaching writing, really.
Essentially, yeah. And there's really nothing wrong with that.
Now, there's a snob situation involved here, too.
Vladimir Nabokov's last, I think it was his last novel, it was called Ada.
And it's an alternate universe story in which the Germans won the First World War.
It is definitely a science fiction story.
Nobody calls Nabokov a science fiction writer.
Kurt Vonnegut Jr. refuses to be called a science fiction writer.
He's afraid it'll affect his sales.
Well, you've got a man like Thomas Pynchon writing.
With Gravity's Rainbow.
Very much like science fiction.
It certainly is. Didn't he write or wrote V?
V is Pynchon, yeah.
Which also is science fiction.
So, Doris Lessing is a very highly-touted literary writer.
That's right. Her last novel about London in the future.
That's right.
Kings and Amos, with whom I violently disagree on most points,
didn't make a very, very good one.
When he said that the reaction of the so-called serious critic
and the public at large is,
hey, this is science fiction. It can't be good.
Or, hey, this is good. It can't be science fiction.
You have stated elsewhere that you try to alter your style constantly.
And I wonder about that.
Don't you think that every author unconsciously identifies himself
through a style which he develops?
Not every author. It's true.
You can get an awful long way in the literary business by developing a style
and being inventive about Hemingway did it.
For example, Bradbury is a perfect example.
But, you know, with a little bit of study and some natural talent,
you can sit down and write one paragraph of perfect Hemingway.
One paragraph of perfect Steinbeck.
But wouldn't you prefer to be identified as yourself, as Sturgeon,
rather than Bradbury or Hemingway or whoever?
Anyway, yes. But, you see, I think that that, in a way, is a limitation.
There is a distinction between something which is original
and something which is unique.
Something is original is that something can be done the first time
and once people see how it's done, everybody can do it.
Mickey Spillane was, in that sense, an original.
As soon as he did what he did, my hundreds of writers started to do the same thing.
And Hemingway, also the same thing.
And Steinbeck, to a degree.
Even Kipling and Robert Louis Stevenson had a very distinctive style,
H. Widerhaeger.
But just try to write a paragraph, an identifiable paragraph,
of Samuel R. Delaney, for example.
A science fiction writer and a writer of the highest caliber.
When he writes Black Ghetto, it is the real thing.
When, in the novel, people are discussing modern American poetry,
they do it in the idiom of William Carlos Williams.
And he knows what he's talking about.
He can change the whole texture and style of what he's saying.
And this is a quality that I admire very, very much indeed.
You get bogged down sometimes, however, in the attempt to change your style.
No.
It's just come naturally.
Not particularly.
I guess it's, I have a good ear.
And I'm more interested in people than in anything else.
And I listen to people.
And I report either what it is they say, or what it is I wish they had said.
But in the way they say it.
And of course, eliminating me, errs and ahs and hums that you run across.
And if you've ever read, and I know you have, of course, in your business,
you would have a typed transcript of a speech.
Terrible.
It's just awful.
Yes, it really is.
You've also been quoted as saying that writing is a way of getting even with people.
Now that sounds very pessimistic and misanthropic.
And you definitely are not that sort of person yourself.
What did you mean by that?
Well, I think this is true really of all writers.
Particularly writers who write, who take their craft seriously.
And yet often unbeknownst to the writer himself, he is in that sense getting even.
Getting even is not necessarily a vengeful thing.
Sometimes it's an attempt to understand why you were hurt.
Why did this person hurt me?
Is it your puzzle?
You're bewildered.
You write a story and before you know it, there's a character in there who has been hurt in the same way.
And from the narrative, even if it's a subplot or a subsidiary line in the story,
a reason for that hurt evolves.
You begin to understand better why you were hurt.
And perhaps you recognize the fact you deserve to be hurt in that instance.
So it isn't particularly a vengeful thing of getting even.
It's a question of understanding your fellow human beings.
I assume that you have developed some fairly strong opinions, beliefs over the years,
whether it be in the area of society or politics or whatever.
Do you consciously utilize these beliefs in your stories, attempt to grind to certain acts, let's say?
I think rather than trying to persuade anybody else to my way of thinking,
I continually attempt to crystallize my own thinking.
If there's a flaw in its logic, if there's a prejudice, if there's an unthought conclusion,
it becomes open for grabs.
And one of my characters is a bigot, for example.
I expose his bigotry.
I mean, I pursue his logic until it becomes ridiculous.
Or I do analogies of people.
I remember I wrote a story one time about, essentially about Joseph McCarthy.
It was a parallel story.
It was cast in the future, dealt with other planets in space, flight, and so on.
But I felt very strongly about that at the time.
And I had to figure out what it is that the man was doing.
Why was he doing what he was doing?
Aside from the course, he was after a certain amount of power.
And there was that within him which demanded a lot of public attention.
But those things are basically superficial.
Why did he want public attention?
Why did he want power?
What was his motivations there?
And so the character was a story called Mr. Costello, hero.
I went right down to the nitty-gritty to find out why a man does a thing like that.
Joe McCarthy, incidentally, was a very fascinating man.
He had two sets of realities.
One of them was the one that stood up in front of the microphones and waved a paper in his hands and said,
I hold in my hand 248 names of communists in the State Department.
And another naive, kind of almost childlike,
I remember one episode where he was riding in an elevator with Richard Rovere, a reporter who did a great deal of work on him.
And Dean Atchison, a man he had virtually destroyed, stepped into the elevator.
And McCarthy said, hey Dean, how you been?
In a very friendly way.
Atchison's lips got white, his ears got red.
Elevator stopped and he got out.
And McCarthy turned to Richard Rovere and said, hey, what's the matter with him?
Has he mad at me?
And that was, I mean, said in real innocence, in absolute innocence.
There's a part missing in people like that.
See, I'm not holding them up as a devil at all, but it's a very, very fascinating kind of human being.
Mr. Sturgeon, it occurs to me that a great deal of science fiction writing is negativistic in a way,
because so many stories deal with utopias and how they fail, that they aren't real utopias.
They're not ideal societies.
I have thought of something, not many people seem to have thought of utopias.
You see, let me go back to something like this.
The cells in your body are different at this moment.
They were when you walked into the studio.
There's a perpetual growth and change within you and with anything that's alive.
And for that matter, the planet that we're on, it started in some coalescing gases
and it's going to end in a bunch of cinders.
And the process between those two has not stopped.
We're sitting on an island of granite, a float on a sea of hot mush,
on a planet which is in motion around its primary.
The sun itself is in motion in the galaxy.
The galaxies are all tumbling around in and amongst each other.
Even the space between is in kind of a turmoil.
If your time scale is large enough, you can see the whole thing boiling.
The only unnatural practice that I can think of, truly unnatural practice,
is to stop for a living thing, to just stop.
And yet there is that about human beings which makes them want to stop.
Now we are where you mentioned utopias.
Virtually without exception, the utopia is a static situation.
You orient yourself toward a goal where everything is all neat
and all the buildings are built around a lake
and they all have ten stories and the people move back and forth
and not smile at each other and love each other a bunch.
But there's no more beyond that.
Maybe internal expansion and I can't knock that.
I mean that the people perhaps are learning more
and experiencing more within themselves.
Nevertheless, virtually all utopias from Plato,
Ronon and I have this quality of being perfected instruments
like pyramids, like the Egyptian pyramids,
finished with a single stone on top.
Well life isn't like that. People aren't like that.
If I were to design a utopia, it would be one of dynamic equilibrium
rather than static.
It would be the kind of equilibrium that a gull has when it flies.
It has to be in motion in order to remain alive.
All life is like that.
Is there a tendency to become pessimistic about the future?
Not as long as we can combat this hunger for stasis
that I think is the human being's greatest disease.
He wants it locked in.
And in spite of what you see in the magazines, diamonds are not forever.
They really are not forever.
Nothing is forever in that sense.
And if you can recognize that and design your life and your politics
and your morality in a sense of ongoing and evolution and growth
and deeper understanding, but always perpetual movement,
then I think you have something like a utopian situation.
But it's a dynamic utopia, you see.
Progress in quotation marks has gotten a bad name
many times in the past.
Mostly from people who don't like the way progress is going.
I mean, there was probably a lot of lip-pulling about coming down out of the trees
or out of the caves.
You know, it's good enough for my grandfather,
and it's good enough for you, kid.
Many people, I suppose they're writers mainly,
are always curious about the habits of another writer
and the possibility of us having writing blocks and how he gets going
and does he have periods of total lethargy and so forth.
Do you have any secrets?
I am the world's greatest expert on writer's blocks.
I had one once that lasted for six years.
Six years.
And you know, when you've got wives and children and then like that,
and the rent's due and so on,
and your income is writing and you dry up for six years,
it's pretty rough.
Very rough.
I think, eventually, to say I can cure virtually anybody's writer's block.
Because it's something that I have involved myself in very profoundly.
I cannot always cure my own.
But I had a profound insight one time.
I had a major breakdown in 1965.
I mean, I really came to be, it was a close thing.
And fortunately, I fell under the hands of somebody who,
well, ideally, he was a Sturgeon fan.
This guy, I swear he'd read more Sturgeon than Sturgeon has written.
He could quote old paragraphs, which is more than I can do.
And he pointed out in that six-year period of the work that I had done before that,
and the work that I had done subsequent to that period.
Because I was, one of the things that was wrong with me,
I was bewailing those six years.
Six years is enough time to get a Pulitzer Prize,
or make a half a million bucks, you know.
And those six years had gone by and everybody was scarred by it and so on.
And I was mourning that fact in these lost years
and that they would never come back and so on.
He pointed out to me that the quality of work that I had done before that
and what was done afterwards, not only the quality but the content.
He said what I'd done before were essentially entertainments.
And nobody's knocking entertainments.
We need them like we need vitamins.
But the stuff that I was doing afterwards was of a totally different sort.
He called them therapy stories.
Well, he was a therapist and that was his particular bias.
But it's true.
Virtually everything that I've written since then has been about people who are sick and get well,
or people who are well and get better at whatever they are.
Obviously, you were growing during that time.
That's the point that he made.
He said you are mourning the fact that the work stopped.
He said the work didn't stop.
The pages stopped coming out.
But he said that's a triviality.
The work continued.
And he said this is documented by the work you've done.
And that was a huge thing for me to find out.
I mean, I'm never going to get depressed about that again.
And if I go through a period where no pages come out for weeks or even months,
I'm not particularly concerned.
I find that when I'm writing, I'm not writing.
I'm typing in some strange way.
It's all done.
And suddenly I'll sit down and type right over 30 hours and type until I fall over sideways.
I've produced a 21,000 word novel, that without getting up from the desk.
But in 18 or 20 hours.
And it's all done.
And oddly enough, the internal structure of the story, the subsidiary plots,
the subsidiary characters themselves, the placing of climax and denouement and so on.
It's all there.
It's all finished.
If you interrupted me in the middle and asked me how is this going to end
and in what way I wouldn't be able to tell you, that's a peculiar internal thing.
Do you turn to other kinds of stories as relief, let's say, from science fiction?
Not as relief, but often another vehicle will say what I want to say better.
And as a result, I've written romances.
I have a book of Western stories.
And they're not like anybody else's Western stories, but they're legitimate Western stories.
And yeah, I've written a great many, well, we're back to the same thing where the addict will say
that Sturgeon does not write real science fiction.
No, essentially I write people's stories.
You've worked in scenarios and for films, have you not?
Yeah, I went out to the West Coast originally 12 years ago to write Star Trek.
I wrote six, I sold four, and I aired two, which is pretty well far from the course.
And those two have been showcased very well.
I mean, they were very successful.
There were many Star Trek addicts out there.
They were Amok Time.
For those who are very familiar with Star Trek, which shows were these?
Yeah, Amok Time was one of them.
The other one was called Shore Leave.
And they've been very successful.
Have you worked in full-length feature films?
Not specifically, no.
One of my stories killed those.
I think one of the best stories I ever wrote.
I mentioned I'd write up for six years.
In the middle of that six-year period, for nine days, I could write.
And I wrote, killed out in, right first draft, exactly where you read it, all the way through.
And then it shot down again.
And it was brought by Universal Pictures.
And they made a movie of the week out of it.
And it is a dog.
It is awful.
I mean, really.
You can't fault the D-9 they used.
The use of caterpillar D-9, which is a marvelous machine.
I've been in love with those big machines for years anyhow.
I'm still a class A heavy equipment operator.
As a person who deals with the imagination, imaginative things,
do you think that this emphasis on the visual, interpreting all of these stories through pictures,
is detrimental to writing of science fiction?
It's hard to say.
There's a man called Byron Price in New York who is getting out a whole line of what they call graphics,
graphic novels, which are as much pictures as they are prose.
And they have something to be said for him.
But I think it's essentially, it's another...
Super comic books, though.
That's right.
But it's another kind of fiction.
I mean, just as there are kinds of music, there's chamber music, and there's symphonic music,
and there's rock in this country.
And so on.
And each conveys to its audience what its audience really wants.
And so I don't knock it.
I am afraid that people are going to stop reading, which is an interesting thing.
You know, back in the 15th and 16th century, if a guy worked on shoes,
he put a big boot up over his store.
And if a guy sold horses, he put a big horse up over his store, because people couldn't read.
Well, you know we're getting back to that.
It's not only watching television all the time.
But the international signs, and now you've got a sign for the ladies room,
and you've got a sign for the telephone, and you've got a sign for the baggage pickup, and so on.
All these little pictographs.
And pretty soon we're just going to be watching the tube and looking at pictographs.
And what price really fine finished prose?
In spite of the fact that the gimmickry is superior,
do you think we've gone downhill from Star Trek to Battlestar Galactica?
Battlestar Galactica suffers primarily from the ripoff.
I mean they take things that are guaranteed successes and redo them in the Galactica format.
For example, Jane and I saw Shane on Battlestar Galactica, virtually down the line.
And this is what they do.
Whatever has been successful, and they put it in the science fiction format and it works.
Star Trek was its own, highly original thing.
The success of Star Trek, the mobiles, people try to imitate it and fail.
The main reason they fail is that Star Trek was started and promoted and still is.
By a man who had ideals.
He really did.
Gene Roddenberry believes in such things as patriotism,
an American democratic ideal, and the equality of the sexes and the equality of the races.
He believes in these things very deeply, his own personal belief.
And in every episode of Star Trek he exploited and expressed these beliefs.
And that's really what reached people.
It wasn't so much Captain Kirk and Mr. Spock's point of dearest and so on.
It was the underlying faith that the man had in his own ideals.
A lot of people who say that that's corny and ho-hum and hooray, let's wrap ourselves in the American flag.
It isn't that, it goes very much deeper than that.
People really do want something to believe in.
Space 1999 and even Galactica don't really seem to give much of a damn about anything,
except getting this show on the air next season.
But Gene Roddenberry believed very profoundly in these things, using Star Trek to express them.
From the visual to other art forms, I know you are an appreciator of music.
Do you sometimes feel that or wish that you were a composer rather than a writer?
Could you express some of your ideas better in some other form, either as a composer or artist?
There are things that you can say in music that you can't say in words.
I am suddenly thought of Giancarlo Minotti, who wrote the medium.
Somebody wrote him once as a triple threat artist.
He was a director and he was a composer and he was a librettist.
And he said, oh no, not triple, double.
And the interviewer said, when do you mean double?
He said, well, yes, I'm a director, but he said as far as the rest of it,
the words come to me encased in music.
To him, they were all the same thing.
Which is a very interesting way of expressing it.
But sometimes music alone, there is a guitar etude by Fernando Sor,
which someday I am going to write lyrics to, but it just absolutely takes me apart to listen to.
I think the greatest piece of music I have ever composed is the Pasecagli in Fugue,
which is a piece by Bach.
It is architectured in such an extraordinary way.
It establishes a fifteen note theme and repeats it over and over again.
But we are rephrasing it and throwing it to various parts of the orchestra,
whether he composed it before an orchestra or not, beside the point.
And winding up with a monumental discord,
everything is huge, it is a great crashing, 115 piece chord that leans over sideways,
is about to fall over.
Then he backs off and he gives it to you in C major, having written in C minor the whole time.
And you just go away feeling good.
And I don't know how you do that in prose, I really don't.
You have a new collection of stories that is just out.
Yes, it is called Visions and Visionaries.
It is from Dell.
It is the first of five books that Dell is getting out within the next year, 18 months.
Are most of these short story collections?
No, two of them are novels.
Two of them are full novels.
The rest of the three are collections.
Do you find it more difficult to write a full length work than a short story?
It depends on the idea that is pushing you.
Often you will start to write a short story and it expands itself into a novel,
or even into a novel.
That is interesting how that happens too.
Often you get a very powerful idea and it plunges you right into it.
And you keep working it and working it until ultimately you find that it needs to be cut.
And what you cut is the original idea that started the whole thing,
because it is taking the bit in its teeth and run off in another direction.
Mr. Sturgeon, it has been delightful talking with you.
Thank you so much for joining us today.
Thank you, and it has been a pleasure to talk to you.
You ask some fine questions, you really do.
Thank you.